# Top-5-European-Football-Teams
###### Football, is a really intense and interesting sport because of the intricacies in playing styles between different nations. Our research and analysis aimed to explore some differences in playing styles as well as other descriptive and performance differences of the top 5 teams from England and Spain from the 2015-2016 season. The teams we chose for our analysis were highly competitive in the year 2015-2016 in both the Premier League and La Liga. The teams consisted of:
#### ● Premier League:
######  ○ Leicester City
######  ○ Tottenham
######  ○ Arsenal 
#### ● La Liga:
######  ○ Real Madrid
######  ○ Barcelona
###### We were interested in better understanding these teams’ success by analyzing past teams performances based on multiple different factors. We will use our knowledge of MySQL and Pyspark to perform multiple statistical analysis. We hoped to uncover descriptive and exploratory statistics about the teams to use them and make inferences about what led to these teams success. We then used the different obtained metrics for our respective teams to compare them together and evaluate their overall performance in comparison to one another. Each team member was appointed a team to focus and run individual statistics on, though all team members used the same dataset. From here, we will use our knowledge of AWS EMR clusters and Hadoop to build a platform that allows us all to connect and test out our analyses.

#### Background/Questions
###### We would like to know if there is optimization which can be done regarding player heights, weights & team playing styles. Specifically, we’re wondering if there are optimal heights and weights for successful soccer players, and if that translates to an ideal average for the team. We’d also like to know if there are ‘must-haves’ vs ‘nice-to-haves’ when it comes to team play style, and what types of features and styles of playing lead to best overall performance. These different styles include:
###### ● Build up play speed
###### ● Chance creation crossing
###### ● Build up play passing
###### ● Chance creation passing
###### ● Chance creation shooting
###### ● Defence pressure
###### ● Defence Aggression
###### ● Defence Team Width
#### Dataset Used
###### The European Soccer Database is a Kaggle database that contains data on individual teams, players, matches, leagues, and countries. The dataset included over 10,000 matches as well as all countries in Western Europe, with the easternmost being Poland. We have data for 11 leagues, including some of the most popular in the world, like Manchester United and FC Barcelona. There are 299 different teams included in the data, with attribute data over time for each of them. Lastly, there is granular information on almost 26 thousand matches.
 
### Analysis Methods
###### We focused on the teams that came out on top in the last season recorded in the dataset, 2015 - 2016. For the Premier League, respectively, these teams are Leicester City, Arsenal, Tottenham Hotspur. In La Liga the top teams were FC Barcelona and Real Madrid (see Figure 1).
###### The way that the dataset was given to us through Kaggle was in SQLite format. We used this opportunity to use our past knowledge of SQL to run mySQL queries through Python. In order to run most of our analysis, we had to use JOINS to get multiple tables represented in the data. We created an ER diagram to represent the connections and joins that were necessary to connect the individual tables of data (see Figure 2).
### Results & Findings
###### We ran a linear regression on the subsetted table player_attributes, using overall rating as our target variable, and then predictor features like potential, crossing, ball control, head accuracy, passing, etc. Then, we were able to see that the most significant features are : potential, ball control, and reaction time. This model fit the data with 84% accuracy, and with a mean squared error of 2.8 (see Figure 6).
###### From here, we went on to see how a player’s height correlates with their overall potential as a player (see Figure 7). From this model, we can see that the players with the highest overall ratings were shorter and weighed less than most of the other team members, so it was interesting seeing that the smaller players end up having better performance overall. We can see on this graph that the ideal height is 170 cm or someone who is about 5 foot 7 inches, but also the players on the taller end, those about 6 foot and above also showed higher potential. As for the five teams we looked into, we found that the average height for the players on these five teams is above the industry average while the average weight for the players was either above or below the industry average.
###### Another interesting find that we were able to formulate from our analysis was that all of our teams seemed to score more both on average and overall when they were away versus when they were at home (see Figure 5). This isn’t to say that our teams weren’t able to score when they played at home (they in fact scored a lot when they were at home as well), but instead shows us that for a team to possibly find success, they must truly capitalize on their away goal opportunities. 
### Findings By Team
#### Leicester City
###### To begin, we have Leicester City. We chose to focus on them as a team because they are a great example of a team that started pretty low in rank out of the Premier League, but had a remarkable rise in the 2015-2016 season.
###### For some descriptive statistics to compare their player attributes to the other teams, Leicester City scored 114 total goals from 2008-2016 and conceded 103 goals. The average height of the players was 181 cm, and the average weight was 170 lbs. As a team, they had 3 left footed players and 24 right footed players. In the bar graph, we see that the majority of games are wins, but the games lost and tied are very similar (see Figure 8).
###### In Figure 9, we wanted to analyze how different teams excel at different things, and how different playing styles correlate to overall performance. We can see that Leicester city is best at shooting and crossing, but has recently taken a dip in their shooting averages. We can also see that their level of aggression started low but has been steadily increasing over time which can definitely be attributed to their success as a team in later years.
###### After finding these descriptive statistics, we were mostly interestested in seeing how a team’s playing style changes over time, and what contextual evidence, that’s maybe not in the data, can be attributed to these changes. Upon further research, Leicester City has been a worldwide success story, a New York Times article called it ‘the remarkable rise of Leicester City’. From the bottom of the table, to the Premier League Champs in 2015, we also see a change in coach to Claudio Ranieri, which would potentially attribute to their success as a team. Some more evidence of their success was a new striker Jamie Vardy, who broke the record for consecutive games with a goal in the Premier League, so this starts to explain their rise as a team, and the shifts we see in the playing styles over time.
#### Arsenal
###### Taking a deeper dive into the 2015-2016 season for Arsenal, we were able to find some interesting insights. There were simple insights such as they have 20 players who are right footed which outnumbers the 6 players who play with their left foot. The average height of the players was around 180.44 centimeters, which equates to 5’10” as the average height of the players and the average weight of the players was around 160 pounds, which compared to industry standards at the time, Arsenal was on average one inch shorter and about 6 pounds lighter. If you look at Figure 11, you will see a graph demonstrating how Arsenal style of play changed over the years. Focusing mainly on the 2015-2016 season however, you can see that their main tactics for playing and winning games was their speed getting across the field, the width that the team covered the field, and the overall pressure they put against their opponents.
###### Finishing 2nd overall in the 2015-2016 season wouldn’t have been possible without their star players Mesut Ozil, Petr Cech, and Nacho Monreal. After seeing the graph of how their playing changed, we wanted to look into more about coaching changes that could have occurred that may have affected their style of play. From 1998 until 2018, Arsenal had the same Manager, which doesn’t explain the change of style. In fact, during this season most of the other big teams in the league were changing Managers, so Arsenal had a fight before them to remain at the top with these other teams. But according to an article written in Vavel, the 2015-2016 season for Arsenal was one of the best and weirdest yet. Mesut Ozil was on a roll that year, almost breaking multiple records previously set in Arsenal’s history which was impressive because he was only traded from Real Madrid three years prior. The bad was they struggled with a lot of different injuries this year, making their team lose more games than expected in the regular season. By the time playoffs came around, they had a full, healthy team.
#### Tottenham
###### Like the others, Tottenham’s play style has changed drastically over the years. Chance creation passing, which is in red in Figure 17 used to be one of their key tactics, but decreased by almost half over the years from from 70 to 40 per game. On the other hand, their defensive pressure in brown skyrocketed, over doubling to 60 per game. One thing they consistently perform well in is chance creation shooting in purple, which consistently sits above 60 per game. Looking at factors not included in this dataset, we see that from 2010 to 2016, Tottenham had numerous coaching changes. Three, to be exact, in 2012, 2013, and 2014. The coaching changes in 2012 & 13 were ineffective at changing the team’s play style. We can see in Figure 17 that in 2011 and 13, actions like chance creation passing and build up play speed continue to decline at the rate they did before the coaching changes. It wasn’t until the 2014 coach, Mauricio Pochettino took over that the team started to improve on almost everything, apart from chance creation crossing and passing.
#### Barcelona
###### For FC Barcelona, when looking at their success during the 2010-2015 seasons and in particular the 2015-2016 season, as that was the season they were number 1 in La Liga (see Figure 1) , there seemed to be some interesting attributes that could’ve helped aid their success. Firstly, when looking at the factors that lead to FC Barcelona’s success, it seems that they kept a pretty constant focus on their defence (see Figure 15) throughout all the seasons that were recorded. This is very interesting considering the amount of really good offensive weapons that they had on their team at the time (two examples were Messi and Neymar). However, one could argue that having naturally gifted goal scorers on your team could allow for you to just focus on your defense, because they know they won’t have a problem scoring when given the chance. This can’t be determined as a definitive reason as to why FC Barcelona has had great success from the span of the 2008 to 2016 season, but this and wins were really the only things that remained constant throughout the dataset.
###### A few other descriptive statistics that could fall into play were the average weight and height of the players with the average height being 178 inches, or 5’8”, and the average weight being 164 pounds. One thing that was really interesting to us was when comparing FC Barcelona’s average weight and height to a player’s potential to their height, FC Barcelona’s average seems to fall at one of the lesser points on the graph (178). However, even with this, it seems that the team was still able to find success throughout the many years that were collected in this dataset.
###### Another characteristic that we thought was very interesting in this analysis was that shared by not only my team, but also every other team in the dataset, was that all of our teams tended to score more away goals than home goals. Knowing that a team plays the same amount of home games as they do away games per season, it means that one attribute that could bring you success as a football club is making sure you capitalize on your opportunities when away. Now, FC Barcelona also had many home goals throughout their season as well, but the ratio between the two was around -2. Meaning that, on average, they should be expected to score 2 away goals for every home goal scored.
#### Real Madrid
###### While looking at the success of the 2010-2015 Real Madrid Football Club one could say it was attributed by three main factors, these factors being Passing, Shooting, and a Wide Defense (see Figure 13). Real Madrid has found real success with creating chances for passing and shooting throughout the 90 minute match, having 843 Goals Scored over 8 years making them the second highest amount of goals scored out of the teams analyzed, falling short 6 goals from being the highest amount of goals scored. Top power forwards such as Christiano Ronaldo, Garath Bale, and Kareem Benzema, give Real Madrid a great chance for success on offense. Since Madrid has very talented offensive players, the team puts an emphasis on creating chances for shots meaning that they take advantage of their shooters accuracy to help them win games. On top of having great strikers Real Madrid has some of the best midfielders and defenders in the whole world, meaning that their ball skills are impeccable giving Madrid the chance to pass the ball continuously, creating more chances for shots on goal. When looking at Real Madrid’s results one could conclude that they are doing something right, and that is their chance creation of shooting/passing and their wide defense.
### Implications
###### After reviewing our data and comparing our different teams’ analyses, we can make inferences about future team performance and determine specific implications from the soccer data. Another aspect we discovered in our contextual research on our teams that heavily relies on the success of teams is sports betting. There are many insights that can be gathered from this analysis, we can potentially apply them to future matches and predict the outcome, influencing the industry of sports betting.
###### Soccer betting happens more than any other sports. People are serious about their sports betting, and looking forward, our models could predict which teams were going to win based on their past team performance in combination with their player attributes, whether they’re match is home or away, or other attributes we haven’t yet explored. The teams featured in our analyses have all dedicated fan bases, huge betting odds, and millions of dollars behind them, so there would be a lot riding on the ability to predict team performance in the future.
###### Another important insight we gained from our analyses was in analyzing the teams’ ‘playing tyle’ season after season. As mentioned above, our team specific playing styles varied and could be directly attributed to overall success of the team, whether it was an increase in defensive techniques, or a new striker dominating the shooting game. Further investigation into the correlations and significance of playing styles could be beneficial in predicting team performance. The implications of our research can overall help fans and teams compare their individual team characteristics against each other and use it as a competitive advantage.
